
APPENDIX A

Modification Instructions

You have been chosen for this study because you have
shown low susceptibility in a previous hypnosis session. We
elieve that people show low responsiveness to suggestions
because they are not quite sure how they should be thinking or
acting in response to suggestions. Research has shown that
instruction and practice can significantly increase an
individual's responsiveness. So today's session is a
practice/training session.

The procedure is this: First you will hear a lengthy
introduction to hypnosis. It will outline some of the myths
and misconceptions of hypnosis. For example, hypnosis is not
a trance state, there is no loss of control, no loss of
consciousness. The person responding to suggestions is in
complete control, very aware of his/her mind and body. In
fact, the person who is responding hypnotically is probably
more aware and more in control of directing his or her mind
than at any other time during the day. The sleep suggestion
in the “induction” is there to help people become calm and
relaxed in order that they may concentrate, (May be some
discussion on any of these myths, according to the subject).

Following the taped introduction to hypnosis, you will
hear an introduction to the first suggestion. There will be
four suggestions presented in all. After each one is

introduced, you will vew a videotape of a subject responding
55
to the suggestion. She has practised the skill which you are

going to learn today. You will notice that this tape is not
of a spontaneous session such as this one. Rather, it is a
condensed presentation of many points which we wanted to
communicate to you.

The subject on the videotape will be verbalizing her
responses throughout the session so that you will know what
kinds of things she is thinking about. You will not be
expected to do this. Following this, you will see a short
interview during which the major points will be clarified.
Pay close attention to these points.

Then you will have an opportunity to practice responding
to the suggestion yourself. In this way, we will work with
four suggestions together, using the videotape as a model. At
the very end of the session, after you have practised the four
suggestions, you will be given four different suggestions
which will be presented one after the other. You will respond
to this series without any instructions or coaching. This is
your opportunity to demonstrate whatever skills you have
acquired during the session in a spontaneous manner. Do you

have any questions about the procedure?

A R a j s t 2
EXPERIMENTER ROLLS THE AUDIOTAPE UNTIL THE LAST LINE OF THE
ARM RISING SUGGESTION: "Here is the subject responding to the

arm rising suggestion." THEN STOP THE AUDIOTAPE AND TURN ON
56
THE VIDEO TO PLAY THE RESPONSE AND THE INTERVIEW FOR THIS

SUGGESTION.

Discussion with Subject

You will notice that there are two parts involved in
responding to any suggestion: the physical and the mental.
For example, for the arm rising suggestion, the subject must
physically raise her arm. Some “thing” does not come along
and raise it for her. However, it feels like it's going up by
itself because of the mental imaginings.

You must concentrate on a mental image which is
consistent with the suggestion, such as imagining that your
arm is being pumped up with helium or whatever. Some people
find that imagining balloons attached to their arm is a good
image to work with. Others find that they can involve
themselves in the suggestion with an image of a pulley slowly
pulling their arm up. Others relate to that sensation you get
when you are in the water and your arm floats upwards. Pick
a mental image that you can relate to. One that you can work
with. If you start with one type of mental imagining and find
you cannot focus on it for the full length of the suggestion,
feel free to incoroporate another imagining.

The subject, you will notice, did not limit herself to
the details provided by the suggestion. She elaborated upon
the suggestion by thinking about the hose leading to the pump
and the details of the pump itself. She mentions that she did
57
not let criticisms or comments about what she was doing,
arise. The mind can only attend to one thing at a time, and
she kept it concentrated on the experience of the suggestion.
Any inner verbalization must be in keeping with the
suggestion. “It's light", etc., not "this is dumb" or “it's
heavy.

Feedback betweeen these mental and physical aspects
reinforce each other. the physical movement of the arm rising
reinforces the mental image which, in turn, reinforces the
physical movement. The result is that there is a feeling of
lightness and the feeling that it is going up by itself. You
must make it feel as if it is going up by itself.

HELPFUL HINTS IF THE SUBJECT HAS TROUBLE

You will notice that as you take a deep inhalation your
upper body moves. Try, if you are having trouble with
beginning the physical movement, raising your arm with each
breath, letting it rest on the exhalation and raising it more
on the next inhalation. Deep breathing and relaxation are
appropriate to a suggestion which involves lightness. Use a
mental image that is familiar to you. Keep the arm loose, not
tight or clenched. Otherwise, the feedback is of heaviness,
etc. . So pick an image to work with. I'll play the
suggestion and you try it, using the things you just seen and

we have talked about. Sit back and close your eyes.
58
THE EXPERIMENTER PLAYS THE TAPE OF THE ARM RISING SUGGESTION.
UNOBSTRUSIVELY, THE EXPERIMENTER SCORES THE SUBJECT ON THE
OBJECTIVE MEASURE. IF THE SUBJECT RAISES HIS/HER ARM MORE
THAN SIX INCHES, THE SUBJECT PASSES THE OBJECTIVE ASPECT OF
THE ITEM AND RECEIVES A "1". IF THE SUBJECT DOES NOT RAISE
HIS/HER ARM MORE THAN SIX INCHES, THE SUBJECT FAILS THE
OBJECTIVE ASPECT OF THE SUGGESTION, WILL GET A “0O“ AND WILL
HAVE TO TRY IT AGAIN. AS SOON AS THE SUGGESTION IS OVER, THE
EXPERIMENTER GIVES THE SUBJECT THE TWO-PAGE, TWO-QUESTION
SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE ITEMS. NO TALKING WITH THE SUBJECT
UNTIL THESE QUESTION HAVE BEEN ANSWERED. SCORING ON THE

SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS IS AS FOLLOWS:

THE SUBJECT MUST RESPOND TO BOTH QUESTIONS WITH A (c) OR (da)
IN ORDER TO PASS THE SUBJECTIVE ITEMS. IN ORDER FOR THE
SUBJECT TO MOVE ON TO THE NEXT SUGGESTION, HE/SHE MUST HAVE
PASSED THE QBJECTIVE ITEMS AS WELL AS BOTH SUBJECTIVE
QUESTIONS. A “O" ON THE OBJECTIVE WITH PASSES ON THE
SUBJECTIVE DOES NOT ALLOW THE SUBJECT TO MOVE ON. CONVERSELY,
A PASS ON EITHER OR BOTH SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS DOES NOT
CONSTITUTE AN OVERALL PASS ON THE SUGGESTION UNLESS THE
OBJECTIVE SCORES IS A "1". THIS SCORING PROCEDURE IS USED FOR
EACH SUGGESTION DURING THE SESSION. THE SUBJECT MAY REPEAT
EACH SUGGESTION ONLY ONCE.

IF THE SUBJECT MUST REPEAT THE SUGGESTION, THE EXPERIMENTER

59
REINFORCES ANYTHING POSITIVE ABOUT THE SUBJECT'S RESPONSE.

ASK WHAT MENTAL IMAGE THE SUBJECT USED AND PERHAPS SUGGEST AN
ELABORATION OR A DIFFERENT ONE. REITERATE THE MAJOR POINTS OF
THE RESPONSE AND MAKE SURE THEY ARE CLEAR TO THE SUBJECT.
EMPHASIZE STRONG CONCENTRATION AND INVOLVEMENT. CHECK
VERBALIZATION FOR JUDGEMENTS OR CRITICISMS DURING THE
REPSONSE. PERHAPS THE SUBJECT IS TRYING TOO HARD OR IS TOO
RIGID. SOMETIMES, TOO MUCH EFFORT SERVES ONLY TO REMIND THE
SUBJECT THAT THEY ARE UTILIZING SOME STRATEGIES AND THEREFORE

DOES NOT ALLOW THAT SENSE OF “INVOLUNTARINESS" TO DEVELOP.

IF THE SUBJECT MUST REPEAT THE SUGGESTION, ROLL THE SECOND
TAPE (WHICH ONLY HAS THE PRACTICE SUGGESTION ON IT). SCORING
PROCEDURE IS THE SAME AS ABOVE. THE SUBJECT GOES ON TO THE
SECOND SUGGESTION REGARDLESS OF THE SCORE. IF THE SUBJECT DID
NOT IMPROVE, TELL THEM IT IS A DIFFICULT ONE AS IT GOES
AGAINST GRAVITY, AND THAT MOST PEOPLE FIND THE NEXT SUGGESTION
MUCH EASTER.

and u

ROLL THE AUDIOTAPE UNTIL THE VOICE SAYS: “She will verbalize
aloud the appropriate kind of thoughts and imaginings one
should have during the suggestion". THEN PLAY THE VIDEO OF

THE SUBJECT RESPONDING AND THE INTERVIEW.
60
Discussion with the subject

This suggestion is easier for a lot of subjects because
it is easier to enter into the physical part of the
suggestion. As you were told con the tape, the challenge to
try to pull your hands apart is part of the suggestion. By
the time you are asked to try to pull your hands apart, you
should be so involved in your imagining, it will feel as if
you really cannot pull them apart.

Also, as you were told for the first suggestion, you are
not limited to using the image given in the suggestion. If
you find it easy tc imagine your hands welded like two cold
blocks of steel, that is fine. But if you find this a
difficult situation to imagine, feel free to imagine anything
you like as long as it is consistent with the idea that you
cannot get your hands apart. Some people have found it useful
to imagine that their hands are glued together or bound
together by heavy string or chains.

When asked to try to pull ; sur hands apart, you can
reinforce your mental image by pressing down on your fingers
and pushing on your palms as your hands are clasped together
(demonstrate for subject). This way, you can actually make a
moderate physical effort to pull your hands apart, while
ensuring that they will not actually come apart. The pressure
of the pulling/pushing of the fingers and palms creates a
tension that easily reinforces a "can't pull apart" feeling.

Do not try too hard though, because you want it to seem that
61
this is not happening through any effort on your part. In
other words, you want it to seem as if you are trying, but
somehow just cannot get them apart. If you have ever tried to
move something impossibly heavy or stuck, you will know the
feeling of "can't do it" and be able to bring that feeling to
the hand lock suggestion. The innner dialogue should be along
these lines: "It's stuck", "I can't pull them apart", etc. .
Okay, I will play the suggestion now. By the way, you may put

your hands on your lap if you want.

THE EXPERIMENTER PLAYS THE TAPE WITH THE SUGGESTION AND SCORES
ACCORDING TO OBJECTIVE “PASS” (1) (IF HANDS DID NOT COME
APART) CR "FAIL" (0) (IF HANDS DID COME APART). AFTER THE
SUGGESTION IS OVER, GIVE THE SUBJECT THE TWO QUESTIONS
PERTAINING TO THE SUBJECTIVE EXPERIENCE DURING THIS

SUGGESTION; SCORE THESE AS IN THE ARM RISING SUGGESTION.

Book Suggestion
PLAY THE INTRODUCTION ON THE AUDIOTAPE AND THEN AT “pay

careful attention" STOP IT AND TURN ON THE VIDEOTAPE FOR THE

RESPONSE AND THE INTERVIEW. STOP VIDEO

Discussion with the Subject

For this suggestion, it is important to embellish the
62
imagining with as many details as you can. First, pick a
Place on the table where you are going to imagine the book to
be. Once your eyes are open, just keep looking at that place
on the table. Of course, you will not see a real, concrete
book, but in your mind's eye you can trace the outline of
where the book would be if it was really there. Imagine what
angle it's on. Is it even with the edge of the table? off to
the side? And so forth. Imagine where you will be moving it
with your hand. Think about the size of the book, how much
space it would take up on the table, what colour it is, what
the title looks like and where it is on the book, is the book
paperback or hardcover? etc.

Have you got a desk at home or in the library where you
habitually study? If so maybe you would like to imagine that
you are sitting there studying and that you are going to
change to another topic, so you want to move this book to the
side.

Pick a book you know, something you are familiar with.
If you want, you can imagine that you brought it with you and
you have just placed it on the table, You may use a magazine,
if you wish. Also, some subjects have said that a simple
cover is best and they can "see" it more clearly than one with
a complex desing or colour scheme.

Make sure that you have the image firmly in your mind's
eye before you open your eyes. You may experience a slight

“jolt” or disconcerted feeling when you first open your eyes,

63

but just calmly continue to hold the image and "build" it on
the table in front of you. It is important that you involve
yourself with the suggestion, without distraction, for the
whole time. If the image fades or the concentration wanes,
just bring it back by working with one of the details of the
book. Like the other suggestions, this one involves a
physical movement, that of pushing the book aside. Even if
you are having difficulty imagining the book there, follow
through on the physical motion of pushing the book aside.
While you are doing this, imagine what the book would feel
like against your hand and how much pressure it would take to

push it aside.

HELPFUL HINTS: IF THE SUBJECT HAS TROUBLE WITH THIS
SUGGESTION, FOR EXAMPLE, THEY SAY THEY CANNOT SEE THE BOOK,
TELL THEM THAT THIS SITUATION IS SOMEWHAT LIKE THAT OF
CHILDREN PLAYING HOUSE IN THE BACKYARD. THEY IMAGINE THAT THE
LAWN IS DIVIDED INTO DIFFERENT ROOMS OF THE HOUSE AND THEY ALL
TAKE CARE TO WALK THROUGH THE DOORWAYS INSTEAD OF THE WALLS,
EVEN THOUGH EVERYONE WOULD READILY ADMIT THAT THEY DON'T SEE
WALLS OR DOORWAYS OR ROOMS. SIMILARLY, HERE YOU WANT TO

BEHAVE AS IF THE BOOK YOU HAVE IN MIND IS REALLY THERE.

Now that you have a book in mind, sit back and relax. I

am going to play the suggestion now.
64
THE EXPERIMENTER PLAYS THE SUGGESTION. THE SUBJECT PASSES THE
OBJECTIVE ITEM IF HE OR SHE PUSHES THEIR HAND ACROSS THE
TABLE. WITH PASSING THE SUBJCTIVE ITEMS, THE SUBJECT IS
ALLOWED TO GO ON TO THE NEXT SUGGESTION. IF THE SUBJECT NEEDS
A SECOND TRIAL, ASK: What book were you using? (maybe it's
too vague or complex). What difficulty did you experience?
Were you commenting on what you were doing? Were you able to

"see" the book first, clearly, in your mind's eye?

Amnesia Suggestion
THE EXPERIMENTER PLAYS THE AUDIOTAPE FOR THE INTRODUCTION TO
THE SUGGESTION UNTIL IT SAYS: “Attend carefully to what she

does". THEN ROLL THE VIDEOTAPE FOR THE DEMONSTRATION AND

INTERVIEW WITH THE SUBJECT.

Discussion with the subjects

If you want, you can do what the subject on the tape did
and spend the whole time thinking of other things so that the
memories of the suggestions will not come to mind. If any of
them do pop into your thoughts, write it or them down right
away and continue to distract yourself so that the other
suggestions will not come back along with it.

If you find it difficult to disctract yourself, you might

want to try a different technique. You could try imagining
65
that you are in the type of situation where you know someone's
name but when it comes time to introduce that person, you
simply cannot remember it. Or you might imagine what it feels
like to be writing an exam and are unable to recall the answer
to a question you studied the night before. A good thing to
do in this case is to look at the blank piece of paper in
front of you and imagine your mind to be blank too. In fact,
some people only need to be confronted with a blank peice of
paper to feel that certain vague and unfocused feeling. Some
subjects find it useful to imagine that the suggestions are
written on a blackboard. When the suggestion to forget is
played, they then imagine that it is being erased. Any time
they feel an urge to recall the suggestions, they just imagine
that the balckboard is wiped clean and do not pursue the
matter any further. When the amnesia suggestion is cancelled,
they imagine the suggestions are being written on the board
again. Some peopie find that music is a powerful distraction.
Once they click into a song or a jingle, they are oblivious to
any other thoughts.

Some people are able to just let their minds wander and
need make little or no effort to distract themselves from
focusing on the suggestions. They have things to think about,
memories to contemplate, homework questions to consider, etc.
- Whatever techniques you decide to use, it is important that
you make believe that you are doing nothing to make the

suggestion go away, that it requires little effort. You want
66
it to feel like you are trying to remember them, but just
cannot. If your attention is on other things, it will feel as
if the suggestions have "gone away". Okay, I am going to play

the suggestion now. Sit back and relax.

THE EXPERIEMENTER PLAYS THE SUGGESTION AND PROVIDES BLANK
PAPERS TO THE SUBJECT AT THE APPROPRIATE TIMES, SCORES
OBJECTIVE RESPONDING. AFTER THE SUGGESTION IS OVER, THE
EXPERIMENTER GIVES THE SUBJECT THE SUBJECTIVE QUESTION.
REINFORCE THE SUBJECT'S RESPONDING. IF THE SUBJECT FAILS THE
SUGGESTION, FIND OUT WHAT THE DIFFICULTY IS AND MAKE

SUGGESTION FOR SUCCESSFUL RESPONDING.

The Test Suggestions

Okay, now I'm going to play the tape with four different
suggestions on it. They will be presented without any
discussion or dialogue between us. This is your chance to
utilize the skills you have developed today. The suggestions
will be introduced and there will only be enough time for you
to respond. Just follow along and attend carefully to the

suggestions. Afterwards, we will talk a bit more.

THE EXPERIMENTER PLAYS THE AUDIOTAPE. IT HAS A _ SHORT
INTRODUCTION TO THE PROCEDURE FOR THESE NEW TEST SUGGESTIONS
AND THEN GOES RIGHT INTO THE FIRST ONE. THE EXPERIMENTER

PROVIDES PAPER FOR THE AMNESIA SUGGESTION. THE EXPERIMENTER

67
SCORES EACH ON THE OBJECTIVE MEASURE, AS IT IS HAPPENING. AT

THE END OF THE FOUR ITEM-TEST, THE EXPERIMENTER HANDS THE
SUBJECT THE SUBJECTIVE QUESTIONS. ONCE AGAIN, NO TALKING WITH
THE SUBJECT UNTIL HE OR SHE HAS COMPLETED ALL THE QUESTIONS.
WHEN THE SUBJECT HAS ANSWERED ALL THE QUESTIONS, REINFORCE HIS
OR HER PARTICIPATION, IMPROVEMENT, ETC., THEN SAY: That is
the end of the session today. The skill you have practised
today may be utilized in other situations. As well, any time
you are called upon to respond to suggestions, you should use
the techniques that you have learned and worked wit here.

THE EXPERIMENTER SCHEDULES FOR THE NEXT SESSION THE POSTTEST

OF SUSCEPTIBILITY.
68
APPENDIX B
Audio Training Information

Remember how in old movies the hypnotist would have the
subject fixate on a dangling pocketwatch? As the subject
followed the watch with his or her eyes, the hypnotist would
suggest repeatedly in a low voice something like: "You are
becoming sleepy; your eyelids are getting heavier and heavier
and are closing, closing completely; you want to go sleep; you
are falling into a deep, deep sleep". In one form or another,
these instructions are still presented by hypnotists to their
subjects today. You may recall that in your last session in
this lab, you were presented with these kinds of instructions,
albeit without the watch. You were repeatedly told by the
voice on the tape recorder that you were falling into a deep
sleep.

It was once commonly believed that giving subjects
repeated instructions to go to sleep would cause them to go
into a hypnotic trance. When in this trance, the subject was
believed to come under the direct control of the hypnotist.
The hypnotist was believed to take over the hypnotized
subject's mind and body to do practically anything. The
subject was thus viewed as an automaton or robot, who was
fully subject to the commands of the hypnotist. This view of
hypnosis is one of the great misconceptions in the history of

psychology. Subjects in a hypnotic session are, in fact,

fully awake and are in full control of all their actions. The

69

repeated instructions for sleep do not cause you to go into a
“trance” in which you "lose control of your actions" and
become a "robot". No such hocus pocus is involved in
hypnosis. Hypnosis has nothing whatsoever to do with any loss
of consciousness, trances, or a loss of control. Far from
involving a loss of control, hypnosis actually involves a
skill that is within the full control of the individual. It
is a skill that anyone can learn and master, if given proper
instructions and enough practice. In this sense, it is no
different than learning the skills required to ride a bicycle,
to swim, or to solve mathematical problems. The repeated
instructions for sleep simply serve the purpose of enabling
you to relax and put your mind on learning the hypnotic skill.
Few people are ever taught the hypnotic skill, and as a
consequence, few people are able to produce hyupnotic
responses. Asking the subject who is never learned the
hypnotic skill to respond hypnotically is similar to asking a
person who has never learned to swim, to swim the length of a
pool. Clearly, the non-swimmer has first to learn how to swim
before being able to swim the length of the pool. Similarly,
the subject who has never learned the hypnotic skill has first
to learn this skill before being able to produce hypnotic
responses.
In order to enable you to learn the hypnotic skill, I am
going to show you exactly what this skill involves and then

give you plenty of opportunity to practice it. Learning the
70
hypnotic skill is fully within the capabilities of normal
individuals provided they know just what is is that they must
do. In fact, research shows that any well-adjusted person of
your age is fully able to learn the hypnotic skill provided he
or she puts forth sufficient effort. As in learning any new
skill, learning this skill is completely within your control
and is quite rewarding to master. In addition, individuals
who learn the hypnotic skill find it a very insteresting
experience.

What the hypnotic skill involves is that you make belive
something. Before I describe this skill in more detail, let
me give you an example. You are probably familiar with the
Charlie Brown comic strip. In it, Charlie Brown's dog,
Sncopy, is often pictured sitting on his doghouse wearing a
helmet and a scarf, paws outstretched, and gritting his teeth.
Snoopy gets deeply involved in a make-believe situation. He
imagines himself to be in a situation in which he is a World
War I flying ace in the air somewhere over Germany, in hot
pursuit of the Red Baron. He gets so involved in his make-
believe actions that, for the moment, he acutally believes
he's flying an airplane somewhere over Germany. He simply
forgets that he's really a dog on a doghouse. It's plain to
see that Snoopy is in total control of his actions.

Let us more carefully analyze what Snoopy is doing.
First off, he himself creates an entire make-believe

situation. He does this through the direct control of his

71
imagination. He actively imagines such things as the clouds
around him, his own airplane and that of the Red Baron's, the
roar of the engines, and everything else that is part of such
a situation. In short, through his imagination, in which he
is in direct control, he creates an entire make-believe
situation.

However, it is important to understand that the hypnotic
skill involves more than simply imagining a particular
situation. A further analysis of the Snoopy example will
illustrate what I mean. Snoopy did something more than simply
create a new situation. He went one step further and actually
became a part of that situation. He completely replaced the
situation he was in formerly with a new one. he let the
“World War I" situation completely replace the one in which he
was merely “a dog on a doghouse". This had the interesting
effect of making the “World War I" situation seem real,
because it was the only one to which Snoopy was directing his
attention. According to modern psychology's definition of
hypnosis, Snoopy was hypnotized because he was so preoccupied
with his imaginings of the make-believe that he forgot they
were make-believe.

This skill is therefore not unusual nor mysterious. It's
a rather common occurrence and what is meant when someone is
said to be "absorbed", or "deeply involved", or “really into"
their thoughts and imaginings. This skill is, of course,

totally within your control, for you can initiate or terminate
72
it whenever you like. To further illustrate the degree of
control you have in hypnosis, think of what young children are
like when they play. Needless to say, they quite readily get
involved in the make-believe. Nonetheless, even children
possess the ability to shift from the real to the imaginary
world and back again whenever they like. For instance, when
mother beckons that supper is ready, a child easily shifts his
or her attention from the make-believe world to the real world
goal of satisfying his or her hunger.

It's worth noting that we never lose our skill at
becoming deeply involved in our imaginings of make-believe.
For one reason or another, however, we simply do not do it as
much as children do. At any rate, you will no doubt be
surprised at how good you are at this skill. Our research
suggests that you will get better and better at it the more
you get a chance to practice.

Now, what are you going to make-belive? You will not be
asked to do things as extreme or as potentially embarrassing
as being a World War I flying ace or a famous movie star.
Instead, you will be asked to involve yourself in some simple
make-believe actions of a non-embarrassing kind. Soon you
will be presented with some suggestions, four in all, not much
different from the ones you were presented with the last time
you were in the lab. It is these suggestions that will
provide you with the make-believe situation what you will

involve yourself in.

73

The first suggestion you will be presented is an arm
rising suggestion. It will inform you of exactly what it is
you are to make believe. It will specifically tell you that
your arm is like a hollow balloon being pumped up with heliun,
and that the helium being pumped in makes your arm so light
that it rises into the air by itself. In response to this
suggestion, you must do everything that is required of someone
making believe such a thing, you must lift your arm up, and
you must imagine that the helium, and anything else you wish
to imagine that is consistent with such a make-believe
situation.

Of course your arm will not really go up by itself. You
must raise it. However, you can make it feel like it is going
up by itself by focusing on the make-believe situation that
your arm is hollow and being filled with helium. As long as
you focus in and elaborate on this make-believe situation and
do not let yourself think about other things, the arm will
feel like it is going up by itself. You must become very
deeply involved in the make-believe and actually make it seem
real. Becoming involved requires that you keep your attention
only on the things the suggestion tells you to imagine. You
must rivet your attention on the hollow arm, its lightness,
the fact that it's going up by itself, and so on. Don't
imagine or pay attention to anything that is unrelated to the
make-believe situation. Attending strongly to imaginings of

the make-believe situation only, will help prevent the
74
possibility of irrelevant thoughts entering your mind and
shaking you out of the make-believe world.

Before you are given an opportunity to respond to this
suggestion, you will be shown a videotape of another subject
responding to it. When this subject's responses were taped,
she had already gone through a good deal of practice at
responding to this suggestion and several others. I am
presenting you her responses to give you a clearer idea on how
properly to respond to this suggestion. When I roll the tape,
you will observe that the subject verbalizes many of her
thoughts aloud. She was asked to do this as a means of
illustrating to viewers, such as yourself, that all of her
thoughts and imaginings during the suggestion are on the make-
believe situation, and on nothing else. (PLAY VIDEOTAPE OF

MODEL) .

Arm Rising Suggestion

Close your eyes. Place your right arm straight out in
front of you at shoulder height. (PAUSE) Imagine that your
right arm is light and hollow, like a balloon, and that it is
gradually being pumped up with helium. The helium is lighter
than air and it is causing your hollow arm to become lighter
and lighter and to rise in the air. It's slowly rising into
the air. More and more helium is being pumped into your arn,
and the arm is getting lighter and lighter and just continues

to rise. (WAIT 25 SECONDS) Relax your arm now and place it on
75
the table and continue tio relax.

The next suggestion to be presented is the hand~lock
suggestion. It will tell you just what you are to make
believe. It will initially tell you to fold your hands. Then
it will tell you to imagine that your hands are really two
hunks of steel that are welded together. Following this, the
suggestion will challenge you to pull the hands apart.
Despite this challenge, don't pull the hands apart. Instead,
make believe that the hands are so tightly welded together
that despite your best efforts, you simply cannot get them
apart.

Remember what the hypnotic skill involves. You must let
yourself become so deeply involved in the make-believe that it
actually seems real. Do this by only imagining and thinking
things that are connected with the make-believe situation.

Now, observe the subject responding to the hand-lock
suggestion. As she is being presented with the suggestion,
she will carry out all the suggested actions and, in addition,
she will verbalize aloud the appropriate kinds of thoughts and
imaginings one should have during this suggestion. (PLAY

VIDEOTAPE OF MODEL)

Hand-lock Suggestion

Close your eyes. Place your hands on the table, and
clasp them together, interlacing the fingers. (PAUSE)

Imagine that your hands are two pieces of steel that are
76
welded together so that it is impossible to get them apart.
They are two pieces of steel welded together. When I ask you
to pull your hands apart, they will be stuck and will not come
apart no matter how hard you try. Okay, try to pull them
apart. (WAIT 25 SECONDS) Okay, now relax, the suggestion is
over, your hands can come apart again.

The next suggestion will tell you that you see a book on
the desk in front of you even though there is really no book
there. The suggestion will start out by telling you to close
your eyes; and will tell you that the book is on the desk in
front of you. It will suggest that you see the book once you
open your eyes. The suggestion will then instruct you to open
your eyes and actually see the book. In response to this
suggestion, you are to make yourself see the book and, in
addition, you are to make believe that the book you are seeing
is physically there and part of the natural setting of the
room, and not simply something you are artificially making
appear. The main idea idea then, is to make the book you see
seem like a natural part of the room. Just let yourself
become totally involved in making believe that the book is
really there.

There is another thing. Towards the end of the
suggestion you will be asked to push the book off to the side.
This action is also part of the make-believe. Even as you do
it, continue to make believe there is really a book there.

Now, observe the actions of the subject on the videotape

77
when she is presented with the suggestion to see the book. As
before, she will verbalize aloud the appropriate kinds of
imaginings and thoughts one should have when acting in
response to this suggestion. Pay careful attention. (PLAY

VIDEOTAPE OF MODEL)

Book Hallucination Suggestion

Place your hands on your lap and close your eyes.
(PAUSE) I'm not sure if you've noticed, but there is a book
of mine on the desk in front of you. It is an average-sized
book, one like hundreds you've seen. It is right there in
front of you on the desk. Open your eyes and look at the book
sitting there on the desk. (WAIT 20 SECONDS) To avoid the
book being in your way, why don't you just slide it off to the
Side. (WAIT 20 SECONDS) The image of the book is now fading.
It has faded completely and you can no longer see the book.

The next suggestion is one that will tell you that you
are forgetting something you’ know. Specifically, the
suggestion will state that the memories of the suggestions you
were presented eariier in this session are fading completely
from your mind. The suggestions I am referring to are, of
course, are the arm-rising suggestion, the  hand-lock
suggestion, and the suggestion to see the book. In response
to the suggestion to forget, you are to make yourself forget
the other suggestions. Do this by concentrating deeply on

something other than the memories, thereby distracting
78
yourself from them. By distracting yourself in this manner,
you will be unable to remember the suggestions.

The suggestion to forget also requires that you make
believe that the suggestions are actually fading from your
memory all by themselves and that you are doing nothing to
make them go away. Therefore, you are to make believe that
your forgetting is something that just happens to you, not
something that you are causing.

As usual, you are to become deeply involved in this make-
believe. Only attend to the make-believe situation; namely,
that your memories of the suggestion are just fading away by
themselves.

There is another matter. At one point in the suggestion,
you will be challenged to remember the suggestions and write
them down on a piece of paper. Despite this chalienge, you
are to continue to distract yourself from the suggestions
while making believe you really cannot remember them. The
challenge is all part of the make-believe situation. It is
meant to further establish the fact that, despite your best
efforts tc remember the suggestions, you simply cannot;
they're gone.

To summarize, your task is to become so deeply involved
in the make-believe that you son't notice that it's really you
who is preventing the recall of the memories.

Following the challenge to remember the suggestions,

there will be a one-minute pause in which you will be able to
79
write down any of the suggestions that you remember. This, in
turn, will be followed by the cancellation of the forgetting,
that is, the voice will say that you can remember the
suggestions again. Once this is done, you will be asked again
to write the suggestions down on another piece of paper that
will be provided. It will be all right, at this point to stop
distracting yourself, stop making believe, and actually write
down the names of the suggestions on the paper.

Now, observe the subject on the videotape respond to this
one. As she is presented with the suggestion, she will again
verbalize her thoughts. Notice that her thoughts and
imaginings are on things other than the memories of the
suggestions. Notice also that she continues to distract
herself even when she is provided with the challenge to try to
remember the suggestions. The important thing to grasp here
is that she directs her attention to other things, yet never
admits or event thinks that what she is doing is in any way
connected with forgetting the suggesticns. By doing this, she
can do all the suggestion requires; she can forget the
suggestions presented earlier, and she can simultaneously muke
believe that she has done nothing to make the suggestions go
away. Attend carefully to what she does. (PLAY VIDEOTAPE OF

MODEL)

Amnesia Suggestion

Close your eyes. As you recall, you were given three
80
suggestions. However, a funny thing is beginning to happen.
The memory of these suggestions is fading, fading completely.
In fact, you are totally unable to remember what these
suggestions were. Nevertheless, I want you to try to remember
them - even though this will be impossible. Open your eyes
and write down the suggestions that you can rembmer on the
sheet of paper on the desk. You will be given one minute to
do so. Begin (WAIT ONE MINUTE) Time is up.

Now the memories are returning. They are becoming more
and more clear. In fact, you can remember all the suggestions
that were presented. Write down all of the suggestions on the
paper provided. Again, you will have one minute. (WAIT ONE

MINUTE) Time is up.

Instruction for Test Suggestions

In a moment, you will be presented with four more
suggestions that are different from the ones you've just been
presented. In addition, the upcoming suggestions will be
presented one after the other with only sufficient time in
between for you to make a full response. That is, you will be
presented with a suggestion, given ample opportunity to
respond to it, and then be presented with the next suggestion
right afterwards, and so on.

You will not be given the extensive instructions you were
given before. You will not, for instance, be told what an

upcoming suggestion is, nor will you be given any instructions

81
on how exactly to respond to such a suggestion. The reason
why I am taking these measures is because you already know how
to go about responding hypnotically, so going over the
instructions again will probably be dull and boring for you.
There is another even more important reason. Sugaestions
presented in this manner will require that you apply the
skills you've learnec to new tasks. As a good hypnotic
subject, you must be able to respond hypnotically to any
sugestion you are presented, even if you have not received it
before or have not been given instructions on how to respond
to it. With the basic skills you have now learned and with a
little effort and creativity on your part, you will no doubt
be able to respond hypnotically to any new suggestions that
you are presented.

Now, close your eyes and take half a minute to mentally
rehearse the hypnotic skill and really get yourself psyched-up
to respond hypnotically to each of the four new suggestions to
be presented. I'll present the suggestions beginning in 30
seconds. (AFTER 30 SECONDS, THE TEST SUGGESTIONS ARE

PRESENTED)

Arms Apart

Close your eyes. Place both of your hands straight out
in front of you at shoulder height, with the paims facing one
another and with the fingertips of one hand touching the

fingertips of the other. Imagine that a force is beginning to
82

make the hands repel one another. The force is getting
stronger and stronger. It's getting so strong that it is
beginning to push your hands apart. It's getting stronger and
stronger and your hands are moving further and further apart.
(WAIT 20 SECONDS)

The force is no longer active. Place your hands back on

the table. Continue to relax.

Hearing a Voice

You are taking a course in the history of psychology and
you are now in the classroom. In a moment, the professor will
ask in what country Sigmund Freud was born. Of course, you
know from your studies that is was Moravia. As you can hear,
the professor is already asking several other questions about
Freud, and he is just getting to the country of birth
question, so get ready. In a few seconds, I want you to hear
the professor ask Freud's birthplace and raise your hand to
answer the question. (WAIT 20 SECONDS) Okay, he's calling on
someone else. You can lower your hand. Perhaps he'll call on
you in tomorrow's class. Keep your eyes closed and continue

to relax.

Head Lowering Suggestion

Now, imagine that a force is pushing down on the top of

your head, causing it to feel heavy. It feels like someone

has plaaced the palm of their hand on the top of your head and

83

is pushing downward. Your head is being pushed down with such
force that your chin is moving toward your chest. The force
continues to push, making your head feel heavier and heavier,
making it fall forward more and more. (WAIT 20 SECONDS) The
hand is no longer pushing on your head and you can sit up

again and relax. Continue to relax.

nesia

As you recall, you were just given three suggestions.
However, a funny thing is beginning to happen: The memory of
these suggestions is fading, fading completely. In fact, you
are totally unable to remember what these suggestions were.
Nevertheless, I want you to try to remember them, even though
this will be impossible. Open your eyes and write down the
suggestions on the sheet of paper on the desk. You will be
given one minute. Begin. (WAIT ONE MINUTE) Time is up.

Now the memories are returning. They are becoming more
and more clear. In fact, you can remember all the suggestions
that were presented. Write down all of the suggestions on the
paper provided. Again, you will have one minute. (WAIT ONE

MINUTE) Time is up.
84

APPENDIX C

Transcript of Model's Verbalizations during Suggestions

H = Hypnotist M = Model
m risi S tj
H: Place your right arm straight out in front of you at

shoulder height. (PAUSE) Imagine that your right
arm is light and hollow like a balloon, and that it is
gradually being pumped up with helium The helium is
lighter than air and it is causing your hollow arm to
become lighter and lighter and to rise in the air.
More and more helium is being pumped into your arm, and
the arm is getting lighter and just continues to rise.

(WAIT 25 SECONDS)

M: It's going up by itself. If feels hollow. I can see
the pump. I can feel the arm being pumped up. It's
really light. It's moving up by itself. It just keeps
getting lighter and is going up by itself. It's just

getting lighter and lighter.

H: Relax your arm now and place it on the table.

Hand Lock Su
H: Place your hands on the table and clasp them together,

85
interlacing the fingers. (PAUSE) Imagine that ycur
hands are two pieces of steel] that are welded together os

that it is impossible to get them apart. They are
two pieces of steel welded together. When I ask you to
pull your hands apart, they'll be stuck and won‘t come
apart no matter how hard you try (WAIT 20 SECONDS)

Okay, try to pull them apart. (WAIT 20 SECONDS)

M; They're really stuck together. This is impossible.
They're welded together. They're just two hunks of

steel welded together. I can't get them apart.

H: Okay, relax. Your hands are no longer stuck together.

You can pull them apart. Continue tc relax.

°. a cina
H: Place your hands on vour lap and close your eyes.
(PAUSE) I'm not sure if you have noticed, but there
is a book of mine of the desk in front of you. It's
an average size book, one like hundreds you've seen.
It's right there in front of you on the desk. Open
your eyes and look at the book sitting there on the

desk. (WAIT 20 SECONDS)

M: There it is. I can see it on the desk. I1 see the book

sitting there. It's kind of vague and fuzzy ... a

86

vague, coloured outline of the book; but it's there.

H: To avoid the book being in the way, why don't you just

slide it off to the side. (WAIT 20 SECONDS)

M: I'll just push it over there and get it out of the

way.

H: The image of the book is now fading. It's faded

completely and you no longer see the book.

Amnesia Suggestion
H: As you recall, you were just give three suggestions.

However, a funny thing is beginning to happen; the

memory of these suggestions is fading, fading completely.
In fact, you are totally unable to remember what these
suggestions were. Nevertheless, I want you to try to

remember them - even though this will be impossible. Open
your eyes and write down the
suggestions that you can remember on the sheet of paper
on the desk. You will be given one minute. Begin.

(WAIT ONE MINUTE)

M: It's funny. I can't seem to remember any of the
suggestions. All I can feel is a real heaviness all oer ny

body, but especially in my feet. My feet are

87
tingling, they're just heavy and tingling. It's a
funny sensation. It feels kind of nice. It reminds me fo
lying on the beach, letting the sun tan my body.

Watching the people go by and the children ....

H: Time's up. Now the memories are returning. They are
becoming more and more clear. In fact, you can

remember all the suggestions that were presented. Write

down all of the suggestions on the piece of paper

provided. Again, you will be given one minute to do 30

(WAIT ONE MINUTE)

M: Now that I think of the suggestions, I can remember

them quite clearly.
OF/ DE

PM-1 3124" PHOTOGRAPHIC MICROCOPY TARGET
NBS 1010a ANSI/ISO #2 EQUIVALENT

1.0

Wax

EE
eed
nd
TT
eon
———ee
ad

ze It

fe 928 25
ae Roe ce

eae
ix
in
LL.
i

ere

bee

B22 2
a
mo (92.0

88
APPENDIX D

Transcript of Interview between Model and Hypnotist

H: So, how did you find responding to this one?

M: It was really good. With practice, I got better and

better at it.

H: I see.

=

It's just like you said, it's like learning any skill

like swimming or math. It just takes coaching and
practice. And this skill, it's really important that

you use your imagination. You have to picture all the

make-believe events in your mind.

H: Like what?

M: Well, for instance, I just let myself imagine that my
arm was hollow. I could see it that way in my mind; you
know, I could see my hollow arm with the air hose

attache@ to it. I even imagined the pump. It was

ust like the air pumps that they have at gas stations.

I could see the pump and the hose coming from it and

pumping up my hollow arm.
M:

arm

felt

M:

B9

I see.

And there's another really important thing. You really
have to let yourself get into it. That really made the
difference like you said it would. Like, I didn't just
sit back and say, “Hey, I'm imagining all this".
Commenting on it would have just ruined the feeling. I
just let myself get totally engrossed imagining my
as hollow and being pumped up, and when I did, it all

like it was really happening.

So, it felt real.

That‘s right. That's the point of all this, isn't it?

You'tve got to make it feel real.

Yes, exactly.

There's a real knack to it. I found myself getting

better at it as I practiced.

H:

Very good.

Hand-lock Suggestion

H:

How was this one?
90
M: Good. I think I'm really getting good at the skill

now,

H: Yes, you sure are.

M: I just let myself feel everything that was
suggested. It really felt like my hands couldn't come

apart.

H: Anything else?

M: I just pictured that my hands were two heavy, cold
blocks of steel that were welded together. I got so

into these thoughts that they actually felt that way.

H: That's right.

M: If I'd stopped imagining and admitted to myself that
they could come apart, then sure, of course I could
have made them come apart, but that wasn't the point of
the suggestion. The point was to get involved in the
make-believe no matter what. So I just kept really
involved in imagining my hands were welded chunks of
steel. And I did this until the suggestion was completely

over.
H:

91
Very good. That's just what I wanted you to do.

Anything else?

Uh. No, can't think of anything.

Book Hallucination Suggestion

H:

M:

How did you find this one?

Well, before I was even asked to open my eyes, I had
everything pictured in my mind. Like, I pictured the
desk and I pictured the book on it. I pictured all

the details of how the book would be positioned on the
desk and how the book itself would look. I could see
the book near the edge of the desk and on the book I
could see the little call number sticker and the stamps

and everything.

And when you opened your eyes?

You know, it's funny. Opening my eyes didn't make much

of a difference.

How do you rean?

Well, everything I pictured when I had my _ eyes

closed, I let carry over to when I had my eyes open. I
92
didn't
let a thing change. I let myself see the book on the
exact spot when they were open as I had pictured it

when they were closed.

EK: I see what you mean. That's quite clever. Anything

else?

M: There's another thing. It's really important to
concentrate as deeply as possible. Like I know it's
important ‘:o concentrate on all the suggestions, but

it's especially important with this one. You can't
let your thoughts wander for a second. You really have

to let yourself see the book there all the time.

H: Uh hun.

M: There's a real knack to this. It's a skill just like

you said it was, but it's a strange one. It's a skill

at NOT noticing that you're really acting.

A stio

H: How was this one?

M: Pretty goodd. I just let my attention drift away from

the memories of the suggestion.
93

H: So it was YOU who caused the forgetting.

M: Sure, in a way. You can only remember things by sort fo
stopping what you're doing and letting yourself think back

to what you're supposed to remember.

H: Ah yes, I see.

M: I just didn't stop and let myself think back. Instead,

I just let my mind become preoccupied with other thir.

H: Like what?

M: For instance, I noticed that my feet felt heavy and
tingling, and so I just concentrated on theses
sensations in my feet. As long as I did that, and
didn't shift my attention back to what I was supposed

to remember, then I really couldn't remember.

H: Yes, I see. What about when you were told to try and

remember the suggestions?

M: Well, it's like with the other suggestions ... you
know, when I was asked to try to separate my hands. I

didn't stop thinking oi my hands as stuck and welded
94

together. For the suggestion to forget, I just kept on
distracting myself. The point of the suggestion was to
keep up the forgetting no matter what, so that's what I
did.

Yes, that's right. Anything else?

No ... well except that, like I said before, there's a
real knack to this. You can really get good at it once
you practice. You can really feel yourself getting
better at controlling your mind to do all these things.

Almost everyone finds that.

Like, you can actually turn the make-believe into

reality ... and get good at it! It's actually kind of

H:

fun!

You know, almost everyone finds tha‘ too.
95
APPENDIX E

HONESTY INSTRUCTIONS

Hi there, I'm - I am going to play a full length
hypnosis tape and you will have a chance to respond to the
suggestions. I will also give you a response booklet and
another questionnaire; both will ask you about the experiences
you have during the tape. What we want you to do is be honest
with yourself in answering these questionnaires. The reason
I am stressing this is that you might be tempted to think that
saying that you experienced suggestions during the tape is the
correct answer for this experiment, and quite naturally you
want to do well. But please do not mark the questionnaires or
respond to the tape in a certain way simply because you think
it will please us. If you in fact do see or feel things
during the suggestions that's fine, and of course we want you
to say so. If you do not see or feel things, however, we want
you to say that, too. The only correct answer, as far as you

are concerned, is an honest one.

Note: For honesty after condition, instructions were read in
the past tense since subjects had already responded to the
suggestions.
96
APPENDIX F:

The Carleton University Responsiveness To Suggestion Scale
Audiotape Instructions for Induction Procedure

Close your eyes. Your ability to be hypnotized depends
entirely on your willingness to cooperate. It has nothing to
do with your intelligence. As for your will power, if you
want to, you can pay no attention to me and remain awake all
the time. On the other hand, if you pay close attention to
what I say, and follow what I tell you, you can easily fall
into a hypnotic sleep. Hypnosis is nothing fearful or
mysterious. It is merely a state of strong interest in some
particular thing. In a sense you are hypnotized whenever you
see a good show and forget you are part of the audience, but
instead feel part of the story. Your cooperation, your
interest, is what I ask for. Your ability to be hypnotized is
a measure of your willingness to cooperate. Nothing will be
done that will in any way cause you the least embarrassment.

Now relax and make yourself entirely comfortable. Relax
completely. Relax every muscle of your body. Relax the
muscles of your legs. Relax the muscles in your arms. Make
yourself perfectly comfortable. Let yourself be limp. Relax
more and more, more and more. Relax completcly. Relax
completely. Relax completely.

Your legs feel heavy and limp, heavy and limp. Your arms
are heavy, heavy as lead. Your whole body feels heavy,

heavier. You feel tired and sleepy, tired and sleepy. You
97
feel drowsy and sleepy, drowsy and sleepy. Your breathing is
Slow and regular, slow ard regular.

You feel pleasantly drowsy and sleepy as you continue to
listen to my voice. Just keep your thoughts on what I am
saying. You are going to get much more drowsy and sleepy.
Soon you will be deeply asleep but you will have no trouble
hearing nme. You will not wake up until I tell you to.
Remember that the dangers of hypnosis are a myth. Nothing
will be done that is in any way harmful to you. I shall now
begin to count. At each count you will feel yourself going
down, down, down, into a deep, comfortable, a deep restful
sleep. A sleep in which you will be able to do all sorts of
things I ask you to do. One... you are going to go deeply
asleep...two...down, down, into a deep, sound
sleep...three...four...more and more, more and more
asleep...five...six...seven...you are sinking, sinking, into
a deep, deep sleep. Nothing will disturb you. Pay attention
only to my voice and the things I tell
you...eight...nine...ten...deep asleep! You will not awaken
until I tell you to do so. You will wish to sleep and have
the experiences I shall presently describe.

You are feeling comfortable and relaxed, comfortable and
relaxed, and you are in a deep sound sleep...a deep sound
sleep...fully prepared to respond to and experience what I
will ask you to do. Fully prepared to respond to each of the

suggestions which I will now give you.
98
SUGGESTIONS
(1) Arm Levitation. Now, please extend your right arm
straight out in front of you at shoulder height. (> sec.
pause) Pay close attention to this arm, notice that it feels
tingly and slightly numb. Notice too that it is beginning to
feel lighter. Your arm is beginning to feel lighter and
lighter, and as it feels lighter, it begins to rise into the
air. Imagine that your arm is like a balloon. Imagine that
air is being pumped into it making it feel lighter and
lighter. Your arm feels lighter and lighter, lighter and
lighter, and, like a balloon it rises higher and higher,
higher and higher into the air. It is rising, rising, getting
lighter and lighter, rising higher and higher. (10 sec. pause)
OK, that's fine, let your arm go back to its original
position in your lap. It no longer feels light and like a
balloon. It feels comfortable and relaxed just like your
other arm.
(2) Arms Moving Apart. Now please extend both of your arms
straight out in front of you at shoulder height with palms
facing one another and with the finger tips of one hand
touching the ringer tips of the other. (5 sec. pause) Pay
close attention to your hands. Notice the sensations that you
feel in your hands: warmth, tingly feelings, and a little
heaviness. Notice also that your hands are beginning to
separate and move apart. Your hands are moving further and

further apart, further and further apart. your hands feel
99
like two magnets repelling each other, they feel as though
they are being forced apart, further and further apart, wider
apart, moving further and further apart. (10 sec. pause)

OK, that's fine, just put your arms back in your lap and
let them relax.
(3) Arm Rigidity. Please hold your left arm straight out in
front of you at shoulder height. (5 sec. pause) Notice that
your arm feels slightly numb and that it is beginning to feel
tight. Your arm feels tighter and tighter. It is becoming
stiff and tight, stiff and rigid. Imagine that your arm is in
a splint so that the elbow will not bend. A tightly splinted
arm cannot bend. Your arm feels stiff and rigid, solid and
rigid, it feels stiff, rigid and unable to bend. [In fact,
your arm feels so stiff and so rigid that it won't bend. Test
how stiff and rigid it is. Try to bend your arm. (10 sec.
pause).

OK, that's fine, your arm no longer feels stiff or rigid.
You can once again bend it easily. Just let it relax and
replace it in your lap.
(4) Arm Heaviness. Please place your right forearm on the
table in front of you with the palm of your hand facing down.
(5 sec. pause). Concentrate on your hand and arm. Notice
that they are beginning to feel heavy, very, very heavy.
Imagine that very heavy weights have been placed on your hand
and arm. The weights are very heavy and they pin your hand

and arm to the table in front of you. The weights are very
100

heavy a’d they make your hand and arm feel very heavy, very,
very heavy. In fact, your hand and arm feel so heavy and so
weighted down that you won't be able to lift them from the
table. Your hand and arm feel heavy, very, very heavy, much
too heavy to lift from the table, too heavy even to move.
Test how heavy your hand and arm are. Try to lift your hand
and arm from the table. (10 sec. pause).

OK, that's fine, your hand and arm no longer feel very

heavy and you can now lift them without difficulty. Let your
hand and arm relax and replace them in your lap.
(5) Music Hallucination. Please listen very carefully to
everything that I tell you. (5 sec. pause). I have brought a
record player into the room and I am now placing the record
"jingle bells" on it. The volume is turned down so that you
cannot yet hear the music. However, I will slowly begin to
turn the volume up, and as I do you will hear the song “jingle
bells" becoming louder and clearer. You will enjoy listening
to the song and it will bring back pleasant memories. In
fact, you will enjoy listening to the song so much that you
will move your head to keep time to the tune. OK, I'm
beginning to turn up the volume and, by listening carefully,
you can probably begin to hear the tune. The volume is higher
now, keep listening to jingle bells and let your head keep
time with the tune until I ask you to stop. (15 sec. pause)

OK, that's fine, I've turned the record player off now

and the tune has stopped. Just sit quietly for a moment and
101

let yourself relax still more.

(6) Kitten Hallucination. Please keep your eyes closed until

I ask you to open them. (5 sec. pause) Perhaps you didn't
know that we keep a pet kitten here in our lab. It's really
a very cute, fluffy, little kitten. You were so relaxed a
moment ago that you may not have noticed that the kitten
quietly crawled into your lap and is now sitting there. In
fact, if you concentrate, you can feel it sitting quietly in
your lap. In a moment I will ask you to open your eyes, look
at the kitten sitting in your lap, and pet it with your hand.
It's a very friendly kitten and it likes to be petted. Please
open your eyes, look at the kitten, and pet it. Keep looking
at the kitten until I ask you to stop (15 sec. pause)

OK. please close your eyes and relax once again. The
kitten is no longer in your lap.

You are going to wake up in a few minutes. You will feel
refreshed, wide awake, and in a good mood. I will count from
5 to 1 and with each count you will be more fully
awake...5...starting to wake...4...more and more
awake...3...still more and more awake...2...becoming more and
more awake...1...more awake. Open your eyes. Wide awake.

Now please open your booklet and answer the questions.

NOTE: The last line was omitted for the honesty after
condition. Instead, the experimenter entered the room and
administered the honesty instructions.
102

APPENDIX G

The Carleton University Responsiveness to Suqgestion Scale
es se Bookle

Name: Date:
Age: Sex: Occupation:
Telephone:

Student Number:

PLEASE DO NOT OPEN this booklet until specifically instructed
to do so.
103
SECTION ON OBJECTIVE, OU"WARD RESPONSES

Listed below in chronological order are the specific
suggestions you were administered following the standard
hypnotic induction procedure. We wish you to estimate whether
oer not you objectively responded to these suggestions, that
is, whether or not an onlooker would have observed that you
did or did not make certain definite responses by certain
specific, predefined criteria. Thus, in this section we are
interested in your estimates of your outward behaviour and not
in what your inner, subjective experience of it was like.
Later on you will be given an opportunity to describe your
inner, subjective experience, but in this section refer only
to the outward behavioural responses irrespective of what the
experience may have been like subjectively.

It is understood that in some cases your estimates may
not be as accurate as you might wish them to be and that you
might even have to guess. But we want you to make what ever
you feel to be your best estimates.

Beneath a description of each of the six suggestions are
sets of two responses, labelled A and B. Please circle either
A or B for each question, whichever you judge to be the more
accurate. Please answer every question. Make sure that you

do not skip any questions. Please answer every one.
104
1. Arm Rising (right arm)

You were asked to extend your right arm straight out in
front of you, and were told that your arm was rising into
the air. Would you estimate that an onlooker would have

observed that your arm had risen at least six inches (before
the time you were asked to replace the arm in your lap) ?

Circle one: A. My arm rose at least six inches
B. My arm rose less than six inches

2. Arms Moving Apart

You were asked to extend your arms straight out in
front of you with the fingers of one hand touching the
fingers of the other. You were then told that your arms
were moving apart. Would you estimate that an onlooker
would have observed that your hands had moved apart by at_
least six inches (before the time you were asked to replace
them in your lap) ?

Circle one: A. My hands had moved apart at least six inches
B. My hands moved apart less than six inches

3. Arm Rigidity (left arm)

You were asked to hold your left arm straight out in
front of you, and were told that the arm was becoming stiff
and rigid and that it would not bend. You were then asked
to try to bend it. Would you estimate that an onlooker
would have observed that there was less than two inches of
arm bending (before you were told that your arm was no
longer stiff and to replace it in your lap) ?

Circle one: A. My arm was bent less than 2 inches by then
B. My arm was bent 2 or more inches by then
105

4. Arm Heaviness (right arm)

You were asked to place your right forearm on the table
with your hand facing down. You were then told how heavy your
arm and hand felt and asked to try to lift them from the
table. Would you estimate that an onlooker would have
observed that you did not lift your hand and arm at least one
inch up from the table (before being told that your arm was no

longer heavy) ?

Circle one: A. I did not lift my arm and hand at least one
inch by then
B. I did lift my arm and hand an inch or more
by then

5. Experiencing Music

You were told that a record player had been brought into
the room, and that you would move your head to keep time to
the tune. Would you estimate that an onlooker would have
observed you to make recognizable movements of the head
(before you were told that the record player had been turned
off) ?

Circle one: £4. I did recognizably move my head to the tune
B. I did not recognizably move my head to the
tune

6. Experiencing a Kitten

You were told that a kitten was sitting in your lap.
Then you were asked to look at the kitten and to pet it with
your hand. Would you estimate that an onlooker would have
observed you to make a petting movement with your hand?

Circle one: A. I did make a petting movemert with my hand
B. I did not make a petting movement with my
hand
106
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN TO EARLIER PAGES

SECTION ON SUBJECTIVE, INNER EXPERIENCES I

In this section we are interested in your. inner
subjective experiences instead of your outward behaviour. We
want to find out about what you experienced during each of the
suggestions you were given. Please read each question
carefully and answer it honestly. The outward response people
make to a suggestion may or may not correspond to their inner
experience. For example, take a person who's outward
behaviour is arm rising when given the suggestion that their
arm is light and moving upward. In some cases a person may
have experienced his or her arm as feeling light. In other
cases, however, the person's arm may have moved upward even
though it did not feel the least bit light. The important
thing to keep in mind is that one type of experience is no
better or no worse than the other. This is a scientific
study, and all we are interested in is getting at the truth of
what people experience. So please be honest in answering each
of the following questions. Please answer every question.
make sure that you do not skip any questions.

For each question, choose the one alternative that best

describes your experience.
107
1. Arm Rising (right arm)

You were told that your arm was feeling lighter and
lighter and was rising in the air. You were asked to
imagine that it was like a balloon and was being filled with
air.

During this suggestion my arm felt licht:

(a) Not at all

(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree

(ad) To a great degree
2. Arms Moving Apart

You were told that your outstretched arms were
moving apart, and that they felt like a force was repelling
them and pushing them apart.

During this suggestion, my arms felt like a force was
pushing them apart:

(a) Not at all

(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree

(d) To a great degree
3. Arm Rigidity (left arm)

You were told that your outstretched left arm was
becoming stiff, rigid, and unable to bend. You were asked
to imagine the arm in a splint.

During this suggestion, my aim felt stiff and rigid:

(a) Not at all

(b) To a slight degree

({c) To a moderate degree
(dad) To a great degree
108
4. Arm Heaviness (right arm)
You were told that your arm and hand were very

heavy, so heavy that you couldn't lift them from the table.
You were asked to imagine heavy weights placed on your hand

and arn.
During this suggestion my arm and hand felt heavy:
(a) Not at all
(b) To a slight degree
(c) To a moderate degree
(ad) To a great degree
5. Experiencing Music
You were told that you would hear the song jingle

bells and that you would move your head in time with the

music.

During this suggestion, I felt like I was hearing the

tune jingle bells:
(a) Not at all
(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree
(ad) To a great degree

6. Experiencing a Kitten

You were told that you would see a kitten in your
lap and that you would pet the kitten.

During this suggestion, I felt like I was seeing a
kitten:

(a) Not at all

(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree
(a) To a great degree
109
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN TO EARLIER PAGES
SECTION ON SUBJECTIVE, INNER EXPERIENCES II

In this section we are interested in a particular class of
subjective, inner experiences. We want to find out about the
extent to which you experienced your outward behaviour to each
suggestion as happening automatically and without a feeling of
effort. For example, take a person whose outward behaviour is
to not bend their arm when they are told that the arm is stiff
and unable to bend. Such a person may have felt that his or
her arm was unable to bend all by itself. In other cases,
however, a person may not bend their arm even though they know
that they could have bent it if they chose to. This person
would have had the feeling of voluntarily choosing not to bend
the arm. Remember, one type of experience is no better and no
worse than the other. We are equally interested in finding
out about experiences that feel automatic and also about those
that feel voluntary. All we are interested in is getting at
the truth about what people experience. So, please be honest
in answering each of the following questions. Please answer

every question. Make sure you do not skip any question.
For each question choose the one answer that best

describes your experience.
110
1. Arm Rising (right arm)

You were told that your arm was light and rising in
the air. During this suggestion, my arm felt like it rose
in the air by itself. I experienced this:

(a) Not at all

(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree
(a) To a great degree

Remember: if you chose to lift your arm voluntarily, or
if your arm did not feel like it rose by itself, you should

choose alternative (a).
2. Arms Moving Apart
You were told that your outstretched arms were
moving apart. During this suggestion, my arms felt like
they were moving apart by themselves. I experienced this:
(a) Not at all
(b) To a slight degree
(c) To a moderate degree
(a) To a great degree
3. Arm Rigidity (left arm)
You were told that your outstretched arm was
becoming stiff and unable to bend. During this suggestion
my arm felt like it was unable to bend. I experienced this:
(a) Not at all
(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree
(ad) To a great degre
111

4. Arm Heaviness (right arm)
You were told that your arm and hand were too heavy

to lift from the table. During this suggestion, my arm felt
unable to be lifted. I experienced this:

(a) Not at all
(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree
(ad) To a great degree

5. Experiencing Music

You were told that you would hear the song jingle
bells. During this suggestion the tune jingle bells seemed
to occur automatically, without any effort on my part. I
experienced this:

(a) Not at ali

(b) To a slight degree

(c) To a moderate degree
(ad) To a great degree

6. Experiencing a Kitten
You were told that you would see a kitten in your

lap. During this suggestion the image of a kitten seemed to
occur automatically, without any effort on my part. I

experienced this:

(a) Not at all

(b) To a slight degree
(c) To a moderate degree
(ad) To a great degree
